Content: Use cases section (#37)
ecoacoustics/website: content/resources/use-cases/sdm/index.md

---
title: The Australian Acoustic Observatory, Hoot Detective, & the impact of good data on Species Distribution Models 
weight: 1
---

> By Dr Andrew Schwenke & Dr Rob Clemens

Reviewer: link authors to orcids

## Introduction

The Australian Acoustic Observatory (A2O) is a continental-scale acoustic sensor
network that provides data for hundreds of acoustic sensors across seven
Australian ecoregions. This data is freely available to researchers, citizen
scientists, and the general public, for use under [CC BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) licence. More information

> about the A2O can be found in a paper published in [Methods in Ecology and Evolution (Roe at al., 2021)](https://acousticobservatory.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/A2O_Methods-in-Ecology-and-Evolution_2021.pdf).

Reviewer: use the doi link - a wordpress link is unstable compared to a doi

(or if you're linking because the MEE paper is not open access, then link to the DOI version **as well**)

with acoustic data. But when using acoustic sensors, survey effort is much more
standardised than in human observation data, which can reduce or eliminate the
need to use such techniques. Furthermore, species identifications from
ecoacoustic data are verifiable and can exist as a persistent record for future
use and evaluation. 

Third, the field of species distribution modelling has thousands of papers
related to using presence only modelling methods, or using binomial methods
(presence / absence) with pseudo-absence data.  Pseudo absence data attempts to
make the best possible guess as to where species might be absent or at the least
ensures that random pseudo-absence points are not selected in areas where there
is zero chance that the species might be present.  As acoustic sensors are
increasingly deployed an understanding of detection probability begins to emerge
for different sensors and different species. In other words, we can determine
how long a sensor should be left out before we are nearly certain that the
species of interest is not present. Once a sensor is left out the required
amount of time, a true absence location is generated, and such data have

> explosive impacts on how well you can model species distributions using a

Reviewer: `explosive` is a little hyperbolic

variety of both statistical and machine learning techniques.

Fourth, an acoustic device records every single call a species makes near a
monitor. While human observation data can also provide such data, it would be a
massive undertaking to deliver that kind of data at scale. Yet, for many species
that vocalise, one can expect call rates to be highest in areas and times of
year when species are breeding, and vocalisation rates may even be higher in
areas of higher quality habitat (at least for some species). Modelling the
distribution of call frequency or abundance has been done far less in the
literature than presence only modelling, yet the potential insights from such
models are clear. For select species, an area with more calling might be more
important for the species, and an area with more individuals calling might be
relatively more important than the more silent areas.

> There are caveats around all of this of course, but below we demonstrate the

Reviewer: language is a little informal

of just under 80 hours of annotated audio. Audio segments came from most days
spanning between June, 2019, until July, 2021 (Figure 2). These annotations
were summarised in R to get occurrence data for each species, which included
determining if at any point the target species was recorded (presence) or was
absent from recordings (absence).

{{% figure src="./hoot_segments_per_day.png" caption="Figure 2: Histogram demonstrating total frequency of annotated audio segments per day in the Hoot Detective data set." width="100%"%}}

A Powerful Owl presence was recorded in Western Australia, which is quite far
outside of the recognised distribution. Therefore, Powerful Owl records were
filtered further, using a buffered boundary of the known distribution extent
derived from ALA records, to remove these potentially anomalous records. 

The A2O uses a paired sensor design, with four sensors per site. The distance
between sensors is typically within 500m to 5000m. Therefore, we first attempted
to use environmental layers at a high spatial resolution (25m), to capture fine
scale variation between proximate sensors.This came at a high computer

> processing cost. Even working with buffered extents, and using a Big Data PC,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processing cost. Even working with buffered extents, and using a high-performance PC,
```

the process was slow, highlighting the challenges of using such high resolution
data. As a result, we decided to instead use a 250m resolution for preliminary
analyses in R, and a 1000m resolution on the ecocommons platform. To get a
raster stack for the extent of Australia, the terra package in R was used to
crop and mask layers to a vector of the Australian boundary. Layers were then
resampled from their original resolution where necessary to 250m, using bilinear
interpolation for continuous bioclim data, mean for forest canopy and height,
and nearest neighbour for categorical data. All layers were projected to the
project CRS (EPSG: 4326). For Powerful Owl, the raster stack was cropped and
masked to the buffered boundary extent representing the known distribution. 

### Analysis

Powerful Owl presence data were used to extract environmental variable values
from eastern Australia, and the resulting presence data and environmental

> rasters were used in a Maxent model in R [(see code)](https://github.com/andrew-1234/sdm-usecase-master).

Reviewer: maybe you could link to a specific part of the repo that is more relevant to this sentence.

Presence only vs presence absence comparisons were made within the EcoCommons
platform. Evironmental predictors were at 1 km resolution and included the ANU
Bioclim variables, 5,6,13 & 17, run in BioClim and SRE for presence only, and
ANN, RF, & MARS.  First, the presence only occurrence records were used to
generate a BioClim model prediction using default settings. Then the presence
absence data were used in an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) model, Random
Forest model, and multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS).

To examine the potential of predicting call frequency across Australia we
selected the Southern Boobook which was recorded at all but one station (mean
137 vocalisations, range 0 to 993). We then extracted raster grid values from
the two forest area variables, bioclim variables 5,6 and 17, and NVIS, a
national vegetation classification. We then ran a Boosted regression tree (BRT)

> model specifying a Poisson distribution [(see code)](https://github.com/andrew-1234/sdm-usecase-master).

Reviewer: again, link to a useful spot

handle, but further work to tile data extractions and predictions would likely
allow such high resolution predictions, and while not useful at the continental
scale modelled here, there were some stations that were fairly close together,
and with fine resolution data it might be possible to tease apart the within
cluster variation in presences or frequency of presences.

It is well established that acoustic monitoring can provide significant
ecological insights, across both broad spatial and temporal scales. As acoustic
monitoring activities continue to grow, we demonstrate that when such data is
annotated, whether by using
[recognisers](https://openecoacoustics.org/resources/registry/), or through
citizen science projects such as Hoot Detective, the absence data acoustic
sensors can deliver and the call frequency metric provided, can produce game
changing results when looking to understand species distributions. This process
is further aided by the use of online platforms such as
[EcoCommons](https://www.ecocommons.org.au/), which allows practitioners and
researchers to seamlessly examine their data using a wide range of modelling

> tools and trusted datasets.

Reviewer: add acknowledgements
